Quantum Mechanics/Molecular Mechanics Density Functional Theory Simulations of the Optical Properties Fingerprinting the Ligand-Binding of Pentameric Formyl Thiophene Acetic Acid in Amyloid- (1 42)
The binding pocket proposed by Ko nig [Chem. Commun. 2018, 54, 3030 3033] for the biomarker pentameric formyl thiophene acetic acid (p-FTAA) in the fibrillar structure of amyloid- (1 42) has been put to the test by the comparison of theoretical and experimental optical absorption and fluorescence spectra obtained in a water environment and inside the protein scaffold. The optical absorption/emission properties of this luminescent conjugated oligothiophene were studied by means of classical force field molecular dynamics simulations to account for the sampling of configuration space in conjunction with polarizable embedding time-dependent density functional theory calculations of spectra. The nuclear motions of residues in the -sheet were found to be modest, and the time dependence of embedding parameters was shown to be negligible so that a time-independent parameter set could be derived and used for all 300 snapshots considered in the spectrum averaging. In regard to linear absorption spectra, the calculated red shift due to protein binding for the dominant S1 S0 transition in p-FTAA was found to be equal to 23 nm (0.17 eV), which is in excellent agreement with the corresponding experimental result of 18 nm and taken as corroborating evidence for having correctly identified the binding pocket of p-FTAA in the amyloid. The underlying mechanisms for the calculated red shift were disentangled, and it is shown that some 20 nm (0.15 eV) of the total 23 nm (0.17 eV) is associated with increased planarity of p-FTAA in the binding pocket, whereas a mere 3 nm (0.02 eV) is associated with changes in the environment. In regard to emission spectra, we demonstrate that intersystem crossing from the excited S1 state to the triplet manifold of states is a less likely event for p-FTAA in the binding pocket as compared to in the aqueous solution, and we thereby partly explain the much higher quantum yield of fluorescence for the more rigid p-FTAA in the binding pocket. Two-photon absorption in p-FTAA is shown to predominantly occur to an overall symmetric excited state and be more than twice as strong for the biomarker in the binding pocket as compared to in water. The corresponding red shift, on the other hand, is very small. Earlier experimental two-photon fluorescence imaging using p-FTAA is shown not to target the dominant two-photon state, and ways to reach a higher image quality (lower signal-to-noise ratio) are proposed in terms of tuning the laser wavelength toward the region of 600 nm or the synthesis of asymmetric ligands with S1 states that are both one- and two-photon allowed.