Defining the mobility range of a hinge-type connection using molecular dynamics and metadynamics
A designed disulfide-rich -hairpin peptide that dimerizes spontaneously served as a hinge-type connection between proteins. Here, we analyze the range of dynamics of this hinge dimer with the aim of proposing new applications for the DNA-encodable peptide and establishing guidelines for the computational analysis of other disulfide hinges. A recent structural analysis based on nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and ion mobility spectrometry revealed an averaged conformation in the hinge region which motivated us to investigate the dynamic behavior using a combination of molecular dynamics simulation, metadynamics and free energy surface analysis to characterize the conformational space available to the hinge. Principal component analysis uncovered two slow modes of the peptide, namely, the opening and closing motion and twisting of the two -hairpins assembling the hinge. Applying a collective variable (CV) that mimics the first dominating mode, led to a major expansion of the conformational space. The description of the dynamics could be achieved by analysis of the opening angle and the twisting of the -hairpins and, thus, offers a methodology that can also be transferred to other derivatives. It has been demonstrated that the hinge peptide s lowest energy conformation consists of a large opening angle and strong twist but is separated by small energy barriers and can, thus, adopt a closed and untwisted structure. With the aim of proposing further applications for the hinge peptide, we simulated its behavior in the sterically congested environment of a four-helix bundle. Preliminary investigations show that one helix is pushed out and a three-helix bundle forms. The insights gained into the dynamics of the tetra-disulfide peptide and analytical guidelines developed in this study may contribute to the understanding of the structure and function of more complex hinge-type proteins, such as the IgG antibody family.