Project files provided as supporting information to the manuscript "How Communication Pathways Bridge Local and Global Conformations in an IgG4 Antibody: a Molecular Dynamics Study"
June 23, 2021 Thomas Tarenzi, Marta Rigoli and Raffaello Potestio   The dataset contains the following folders: - contact area binding site: files with the computed surface area, used for the calculation of the contact area between PD-1 and the antibody Fab (Fig. S41). - hbonds ab-pd1: number of hydrogen bonds between the antigen and the antibody, for each holo cluster (Fig. S41). - mutual information: matrices with the computed mutual information, for each pair of residues (Fig. S34, S35, S46). The folder contains also the generalized correlation coefficients (Fig. S43) and the correlation scores (Fig. 4, S44, S45), computed from the mutual informations. - networks: communities - for each cluster, each residue is assigned to a community within the interaction network (Fig. S32, S33). betweenness - the values of edge betweenness for each cluster (S30, S31). - output clustering: each frame of the apo and holo simulations is assigned a cluster index, on the basis of the structural similarity (Fig. S4). - PAD: per-residue values of PAD parameter, for apo and holo systems (Fig. 3, S39). - PCA: principal component analysis for each conformational cluster (Section S2.1). - representative structures: representative structures for each conformational cluster (Fig. 2). - r gyr antibody: radii of gyration of the antibody, for each cluster (Fig. 2). - r gyr hinge: radii of gyration of the sole hinge segment, for each cluster (Fig. S36). - RMSD antibody: distributions of the root-mean-square deviation of the antibody, for each cluster (Fig. S5). - RMSD antigen: root-mean-square deviation of the antigen PD-1, for each cluster (Fig. S42). - RMSD binding site: distributions of the root-mean-square deviation of the residues belonging to the paratope, for each cluster (Fig. S40, S47). - RMSD matrix: root-mean-square deviation between structures belonging to different pairs of clusters (Fig. S9). - rmsf antigen: root-mean-square fluctuation of the antigen PD-1, for each cluster (Fig. S42). - rmsf hinge: difference between the total root-mean-square fluctuations of the two hinge segments, for each cluster (Fig. S38). - salt bridge: distribution of distances between residues R979 and D1377 (Fig. 4). - sasa domains: contact area between Fab and Fc antibody domains, for each cluster (Fig. S8). - sasa hinge: solvent accessible surface area of each hinge segment, for each cluster (Fig. S37).